# The shapes of wine and table grape leaves: an ampelometric study inspired by the methods of Pierre Galet
### The leaf shapes of 60 wine and table grape varieties are analyzed using Procrustean methods

ABSTRACT

The shapes of grapevine leaves have been critical to correctly identify economically important varieties throughout history. The correspondence of homologous features in nearly all grapevine species and varieties has enabled advanced morphometric approaches to mathematically classify leaf shape. These approaches either model leaves through the measurement of numerous vein lengths and angles or measure a finite number of corresponding landmarks and use Procrustean approaches to superimpose points and perform statistical analyses. Hand illustrations, too, play an important role in grapevine identification, as details omitted using the above methods can be visualized. Here, I use a saturating number of pseudo-landmarks to capture intricate, local features in grapevine leaves: the curvature of veins and the shapes of serrations. Using these points, averaged leaf shapes for 60 varieties of wine and table grapes are calculated that preserve features. A pairwise Procrustes distance matrix of the overall morphological similarity of each variety to the other classifies leaves into two main groups—deeply lobed and more entire—that correspond to the measurements of sinus depth by Pierre Galet. Using the system of Galet, pseudo-landmarks are converted into relative distance and angle measurements. Both the Galet-inspired and Procrustean methods allow increased accuracy in predicting variety compared to a finite number of landmarks. Using Procrustean pseudo-landmarks captures grapevine leaf shape at the same level of detail of drawings and provides a quantitative method to arrive at mean leaf shapes representing varieties that can be used within a predictive statistical framework.
